# nf-core/rnavar: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline based on public data. Most of the plots are taken from the MultiQC report, which summarizes results at the end of the pipeline.

### Dataset:

RNAseq data has been taken from GM12878 GIAB sample SRA Accession [SRR5665260](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/?term=SRR5665260). The dataset has 38.6 million PE reads of read length 2x151 bp from NextSeq 500 sequencing platform.

### Samplesheet:

A sample sheet has been prepared in the following way to set the FASTQ files to run the analysis.

```console
sample,fastq_1,fastq_2,strandedness
GM12878,/data/GM12878/SRR5665260_1.fastq.gz,/data/GM12878/SRR5665260_2.fastq.gz,reverse
```

### Execution:

The pipeline has been executed with the following command.

```console
nextflow run nf-core/rnavar -profile munin,docker --input samplesheet.csv --genome GRCh38 --read_length 151 --annotate_tools merge
```

It used an institutional profile `munin` from [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs/blob/master/conf/pipeline/rnavar/munin.config)

The directories listed below are created in the `results/` directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

* [Preprocessing](#preprocessing)
    * [cat](#cat) - Merge re-sequenced FastQ files
    * [FastQC](#fastqc) - Raw read QC
* [Alignment](#alignment)
    * [STAR](#star) - Fast spliced aware genome alignment
* [Alignment post-processing](#alignment-post-processing)
    * [SAMtools](#samtools) - Sort and index alignments
    * [Picard MarkDuplicates](#picard-markduplicates) - Duplicate read marking
    * [GATK4 SplitNCigarReads](#gatk4-splitncigarreads) - Splits reads that contain Ns in their cigar string (e.g. spanning splicing events in RNAseq data)
    * [GATK4 Base Quality Score Recalibration (BQSR)](#gatk4-bqsr) - Estimate and correct systematic bias that affect the assignment of base quality scores by the sequencer
* [Other steps](#other-steps)
    * [Picard BedToIntervalList](#picard-bedtointervallist) - Converts a BED file to a Picard Interval List
    * [Picard IntervalListTools](#picard-intervallisttools) - Scatter one interval-list into many interval-files to run analysis in parallel
* [Variant calling](#other-steps)
    * [GATK4 HaplotypeCaller](#gatk4-haplotypecaller) - Call SNPs and indels via local re-assembly of haplotypes
    * [GATK4 MergeVCFs](#gatk4-mergevcf) - Merge multiple VCF files into one VCF
    * [GATK4 IndexFeatureFile](#gatk4-indexfeaturefile) - Index the VCF
* [Variant filtering](#other-steps)
    * [GATK4 VariantFiltration](#gatk4-variantfiltration) - Hard-filtering variant calls based on certain criteria
* [Quality control](#quality-control)
    * [MultiQC](#multiqc) - Present QC for raw reads, alignment, read counting and sample similiarity
* [Workflow reporting and genomes](#workflow-reporting-and-genomes)
    * [Reference genome files](#reference-genome-files) - Saving reference genome indices/files
    * [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution

## Preprocessing
### cat

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

* `fastq/`
    * `*.merged.fastq.gz`: If `--save_merged_fastq` is specified, concatenated FastQ files will be placed in this directory.

</details>

If multiple libraries/runs have been provided for the same sample in the input samplesheet (e.g. to increase sequencing depth) then these will be merged at the very beginning of the pipeline in order to have consistent sample naming throughout the pipeline. Please refer to the [usage documentation](https://nf-co.re/rnavar/usage#samplesheet-input) to see how to specify these samples in the input samplesheet.

### MultiQC report with FASTQC read summary

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

* `reports/`
    * `multiqc_report.html`: a standalone HTML file that can be viewed in your web browser.
    * `multiqc_data/`: directory containing parsed statistics from FASTQC tools used in the pipeline.
    * `multiqc_plots/`: directory containing static images from the report in various formats.

</details>

[MultiQC](http://multiqc.info) is a visualization tool that generates a single HTML report summarising all samples in your project. Most of the pipeline QC results are visualised in the report and further statistics are available in the report data directory.

Results generated by MultiQC collate pipeline QC from supported tools e.g. FastQC. The pipeline has special steps which also allow the software versions to be reported in the MultiQC output for future traceability. For more information about how to use MultiQC reports, see <http://multiqc.info>.

## Alignment

### STAR

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

* `preprocessing/[SAMPLE]/`
    * `*.aligned.bam`: If `--save_align_intermeds` is specified the original BAM file containing read alignments to the reference genome will be placed in this directory.
    * `*.aligned.bam.bai`: This is the index of the above *.aligned.bam
* `preprocessing/[SAMPLE]/log`
    * `*.Log.final.out`: STAR alignment report containing the mapping results summary.
    * `*.Log.out` and `*.Log.progress.out`: STAR log files containing detailed information about the run. Typically only useful for debugging purposes.
    * `*.SJ.out.tab`: File containing filtered splice junctions detected after mapping the reads.
* `preprocessing/[SAMPLE]/unmapped`
    * `*.unmapped_*.fastq.gz`: If `--save_unaligned` is specified, FastQ files containing unmapped reads will be placed in this directory.
* `reports/samtools_stats/[SAMPLE]/`
    * `*.aligned.bam.flagstat`: Samtools flagstat summary of the alignment
    * `*.aligned.bam.stats`: Samtools stat output

</details>

[STAR](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR) is a read aligner designed for splice aware mapping typical of RNA sequencing data. STAR stands for *S*pliced *T*ranscripts *A*lignment to a *R*eference, and has been shown to have high accuracy and outperforms other aligners by more than a factor of 50 in mapping speed, but it is memory intensive.

### MarkDuplicates

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

* `preprocessing/[SAMPLE]/`
    * `*.markdup.sorted.bam`: Picard Markduplicate bam file.
    * `*.markdup.sorted.bam.bai`: This is the index of the above *.aligned.bam
* `reports/samtools_stats/[SAMPLE]/`
    * `*.markdup.sorted.bam.flagstat`: Samtools flagstat summary of the alignment
    * `*.markdup.sorted.bam.stats`: Samtools stat output

</details>

[STAR](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR) is a read aligner designed for splice aware mapping typical of RNA sequencing data. STAR stands for *S*pliced *T*ranscripts *A*lignment to a *R*eference, and has been shown to have high accuracy and outperforms other aligners by more than a factor of 50 in mapping speed, but it is memory intensive.

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

* `pipeline_info/`
    * Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
    * Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
    * Reformatted samplesheet files used as input to the pipeline: `samplesheet.valid.csv`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
